There are three types of organizing the file:

1. Sequential access file organization
2. Direct access file organization
3. Indexed sequential access file organization

1. Sequential access file organization
Storing and sorting in contiguous block within files on tape or disk is called as sequential access file organization.
In sequential access file organization, all records are stored in a sequential order. The records are arranged in the ascending or descending order of a key field.
Sequential file search starts from the beginning of the file and the records can be added at the end of the file.
In sequential file, it is not possible to add a record in the middle of the file without rewriting the file.
Advantages of sequential file
It is simple to program and easy to design.
Sequential file is best use if storage space.
Disadvantages of sequential file
Sequential file is time consuming process.
It has high data redundancy.
Random searching is not possible.
2. Direct access file organization
Direct access file is also known as random access or relative file organization.
In direct access file, all records are stored in direct access storage device (DASD), such as hard disk. The records are randomly placed throughout the file.
The records does not need to be in sequence because they are updated directly and rewritten back in the same location.
This file organization is useful for immediate access to large amount of information. It is used in accessing large databases.
It is also called as hashing.
Advantages of direct access file organization
Direct access file helps in online transaction processing system (OLTP) like online railway reservation system.
In direct access file, sorting of the records are not required.
It accesses the desired records immediately.
It updates several files quickly.
It has better control over record allocation.
Disadvantages of direct access file organization
Direct access file does not provide back up facility.
It is expensive.
It has less storage space as compared to sequential file.
3. Indexed sequential access file organization
Indexed sequential access file combines both sequential file and direct access file organization.
In indexed sequential access file, records are stored randomly on a direct access device such as magnetic disk by a primary key.
This file have multiple keys. These keys can be alphanumeric in which the records are ordered is called primary key.
The data can be access either sequentially or randomly using the index. The index is stored in a file and read into memory when the file is opened.
Advantages of Indexed sequential access file organization
In indexed sequential access file, sequential file and random file access is possible.
It accesses the records very fast if the index table is properly organized.
The records can be inserted in the middle of the file.
It provides quick access for sequential and direct processing.
It reduces the degree of the sequential search.
Disadvantages of Indexed sequential access file organization
Indexed sequential access file requires unique keys and periodic reorganization.
Indexed sequential access file takes longer time to search the index for the data access or retrieval.
It requires more storage space.
It is expensive because it requires special software.
It is less efficient in the use of storage space as compared to other file organizations.